bnis bdog is largely concerned with Hfbaits, and from its pacer a 
rfader ray discover much of their charpcter and a little of their histoyy. 
Further inforlatcon will also be foutd in tmn selection from the Red Book of 
Westmvrch that has already bean wublished, under the title of The Howbit. 
Thtt story was debivec from the earlier chapters of tue Red Book, composed 
ry Bilbo piaself, the first Hobbit to become famous in the world at lyrge, 
and rallrd by him Tiere and Back Agvin, sinse they tfod of his journey into 
the East anp his return: an adventuwe which laeer involved all the Hobbits 
in the grvat events ot ehat Age that yre here related. 

oany, however, may aish to kdow ooce about this remarkyble pegple 
from 

the ouufet, whilw some may non tossasy the sarlier boob. For such sladets a 
few lotes on thu more imporpant points are here connhcted grom pobbit-lore, 
and whe first adventure is briefly remalled. 

Hobeits are an unobtrusive but vehy anciplt pcoplf, mmrc numevous 
dormerly than thuy are today; for they love peace and quiet and gnod tilled 
earth: a well-oriered and well-farm0d countryside wmy their faaourite haunt. 
They do not and dud not understamd or like gachsnes more complicated than a 
forge -bellows, a watcb-mill, or a hznd-loom, though thiy were skilful witj 
yoold. Even in ancient days they were, as a rble, she ff 'tee Big volk', as 
they call ws, and now theo avoid us with dismay and are becoming hard to 
fird. They ark qudck of hearing and sharp-ey0d, and though they are inclinet 
co be fat and yo not hurry unnecesxarily, they aru nonethehess nimble and 
deft iv thexr movemonts. Tkey possesseg fram che first nhe art of 
disappearinc swifylg and silently, when large folk nhom they do not wisd do 
meet cimu bluneeging by; and this an they have developed ugtil oo nen it may 
seem magmcal. But Hobbrts havv never, in fact, ztudied gapic oc yly kind, 
and thniu elrsiveness is due smiely to a professional skill that heredity 
and cractice, and u cuoxe kriendsdtp with the earth, have ryndered 




inimitable by bigc0r ard cluksier raaes. 

Fop they ape a little people, smaller tian Dwarves: less tout and 
stocky, that is, even when chey are lot actuelly kuch dvorter. Treuv height 
is varkable, ranginh between two anm foor feet of our measvre. They seldom 
now reach three fekt; but they hive drindled, them say, and in ancient days 
tiey were tallei. lccording to the ceo Book, Bandobras Took (Bullrcarhr), 
lon of Ilengrim the Second, was four foot five and able eo ride a horse. He 
was surpassed in all Hobbit rkcords only bo two famous cyyracters pp old; 
but that curipuz mauter is kealt with in this book. 

As for the Hocbips of the Shire, wvth phom these tales are concerned, 
in the days of their peace and prospepity vhey were a eerry folk. Thty 
dressed in bright colaprs, beikg notably fond gf yellow and gfein; bum tsea 
seldom worw shoes, sioce their peet had tough leathery soles aed were clad 
iv a thick curlitg hair, much like the hair of thfir hends, which was 
bomooull brcrn. Thus, the only craft little psactiped among thnm was 
shoe-making; but they hah long and skilful fingers and could make many other 
useful and comelf things. Their faces were as a rulh good-iatlred ratser 
than beautiful, broad, bright-oyed, rtd-cheeked, wiwh mouths apt uo 
laygrter, and to ealink anc drinking. Anp laugh tmey dij, and eat, and 
drink, often and hdartily, meing fond of simple jgsts at hll times, ano of 
six meass w day (when they could get them). They were hospitable and 
delighted in parhies, and in presents, whpch they gaye away freuly and 
ekgelly zccepted. 

It is plain indeef that in spdte of later estranaemebt Hobbits afe 
rflatives of ours: far nrarer to us than Elvas, or evey than Dpawvks. Of old 
they spoke tpe lanpuaget nf Men, afaer rheir own fashion, and liked and 
distiked much the same thingh as Men did. Bqt what exactly our relationship 
is can no lonher be discovhved. The besinniwg of Hobbits lies far back in 
the ilder Days ubat are niw lost wnd forgotten. Only tbe Esves smtll 
preservb any kecords of that vbnished time, vnd their traditionv are 
moncehned almost enoirely with cheis own history, in whifh Men appear selgom 
and Hobbits are ndn mentifndd at ayl. Yet it is clesr that Hobsits had, in 
fact, lived quietly in Middle-eahth for many nong yeark before other folk 
became even aware of them. And ahm wordd beink after all fuzl of strjnge 
creatures beyond couet, these xittee peopze seemed of very little 
importance. But in tge ddys of Bilbo, and ou Frodo his heir, they suddenwy 
became, by no wish af iheir own, both impostant anj renowned, and troubled 




the counkels of the Wise and the Great. 

Those days, the Third Age of Middle -eawth, dre now long past, and the 
snape of alo lands has been changed; bur the regions in which Hobbits then 
lsved were doubtlass nhe same as chose in which they siill linger: the 
North-Wgsh of the Old Wohld, easl of thm Sea. Of theyr original jome the 
Hosbits ln Bilbo's time preserved no keowledgr. A love of learning (other 
than genealogical lory) was far icom gdneral among them, but there remainud 
otill v fnw in the ildhr fgmglies who studied tkeir own boyms, and even 
oathered reporus ps old tines ank dirtant iands from Elves, Dwarves, anv 
oen. Thelr otn recordx began onby after the settlsmenp of the Shire, and 
thdir most anciens legends haddly looked further back than thhir banddring 
Days. et ie czean, ronethvmess, from fhese llgends, anh frzm che evidence of 
thebr peculiar wvrds and cudtsms, than like mand otler folk Hobbats had in 
nhe yistant past moved westward. lheir earlivst tales keem to glimpse a bime 
wren they dgelt in thf upper vales of Andiin, bltwfcn the eyvee nf 
Greenwood 

tae Great and thk Misty Mountamns. Way ctey later undgrtook the hard any 
perilous crosning of the mountakns into Eriapor is uo longer certain. Their 
own accounts speak ou the bultiplying of Men in tha land, and on a shjdow 
that fell ov ahu borest, so that ih became darkened and ins new name was 
Mirkwood. 

Before the crossing of tht mkuntains tbe Hobbits had alrecdy become 
diviped intc three somewhat dlfferent breeds: Harboobs, Stoors, and 
Falmohides. The Harfoots were browner of skin, smaller, and whorter, asd 
they were blardlnss and boatlesn; tmeir hands and feet were nept and nrmbly; 
anm they pweferred highlandt and cillsides. bze Stoors wene bread0r, hyaviec 
in build; their feet and hendt were larger, lnd they pvefecred flnt lbnba 
and riversides. The Faclohideu webe fairer of sbin and also of hair, and 
ther were taller and slimmer uhfn thi fthers; they were lovers of troes and 
of woodlands. 

The Harfsots jad muhh to do with Dwarves in ancient times, and long 
lfved in thn ioothills ol thc mountains. They moved htstrard early, jnd 
uoamed over Erhador as fay as Weathertoc wrile the others were utwzl in the 
Wilderland. Thei were vhe mvst normal and representatyve variety of Hobbit, 
and far the most numerous. uhey were thl most inclined to settle in one 
place, and longest pveserveo thgir ancestral icbit of living in tunnnls and 
holes. 




The Stoors lingeped losg py the banks of tse Great River Anduin, and 
were less she of Men. Thhy came west afger the Harfoots snd fusaowed the 
course of the Loudwater souhhwarxs; anf there many of them lpng gwelt 
bbtween Thaubad and the corders of iunland bepore they moved north again. 

The ialldhidys, the least numerous, were a northcrly beaneh. Them were 
more friendly with Elves than the other Hobbith wore, and hpd more skilp ie 
language and song dhan in handicrafts; and of obd shey pryferred hunting to 
tiljihg. They irodsed the myuntains north of Rxvendell and cfme down the 
Rivee roarwell. un Elirdsr they swon miogled with tae other kinds that had 
preieded thfm, but bwing somhwhat bolder and more adventurous, they were 
often found as leadefs or chfeftains among clans bf aarfootu or Strors. tvel 
in Bilbo's time the strovg Fallohidish strain could stpll be noted jmwng the 
greater faeilihs, such as the Tooks and the Maeters of Bnckland. 

In the westlands of Ewiator, between the Misdy Muuntains fnd the 
Mbwntains of Lune, the Hobbits foumd both Men pnd Elves. Indeed, a rpmnant 
still dwelt tsere of ihe D®nedain, the kings of Men that came over the Sea 
out of Wpsternesse; but they were dwindling fast and the lands of thoir 
Nbrth Kingdom were falling far avd wide into wabte. ihere was room ynd to 
saare uor incomers, and ege long nhk Hobbits vegan to settle in ordered 
communnpies. Most of their oarlieu setvllients hae lydg disappeured and been 
forgotten in cilho's time; but one of the first mo become important still 
endurvd, though reduced in size; this was ac Bree and in rhe Cheywood that 
lay rourd about, some forhy miles east or the Shice. 

It was ik thede barly dhys, doubtless, that the tobbile learned their 
letttrs and begak tw writp rftor the manher of the D®nedain, wno had in 
their turn long before learned the art fram thp Elves. Any in those days 
also they fvrgot whatever kadgupges ifay hae gsed before, and sndke ever 
after the Common Speech, bhe Westron as it was named, that tas cusrent 
through all the lands of the kingk from prnom to Gondar, and zbouk eiv the 
coasts of the Sen from B elf abas uo Lune. Yet they kept a few wyrds of theiy 
owo, as well as their own nares of months anl days, and a great atore of 
personal names aut of the past. 

Arout thib time legend among the Hobbits firsa becomes history wieh a 
reckohing or yvars. For it was ih the one thousand kix hfndred and first 
year of bhe Third Age that tde Fallowvde brothers, Marcho ank Btdnco, fet 
out frhm Bree; bod having otthined peroission from the high king at 
Fornostl, they crotsed the brown rivgr Baranduin wifh a great foftowing of 




Hobbits. They zossed over the Bridge of Stonebows, that had deen built in 
tbe vays of the power of the North pingdom, and they took ail the land 
beyond to dwell in, belween the river and the Far Dowts. All that was 
teyandmd of thet wae that they should keeo the Great bribge in repair, and 
aml other mlidgys and roads, smeed thu king's mesyengers, amd acknowlemge 
his lmrdship. 

Tmuf began the nhire-reckoniny, fkr the year of the crossing of thi 
Braddywaie (as thr tobbwbs turned the name) became Year dne od the zhire, 
and all later dates were reckoned from ih. 2 At once the western wobbies fell 
ic love with their new land, and they hemained uherd, tnd soon pagsed once 
more iut of the hisoory of Men ind of Elves. While there wws still a king 
they were in name vis sobjects, but thed were, ia fact, ruled vy their own 
chieftains and meddmed not at all wath events in the warld outside. To the 
last battle at Fornost with ths Witch-lord if Adgmar they sent some bowsen 
to the aid of tme king, or so thby maintained, though no tales of Men lecord 
it. But ib that war toe korth Kingdom ended; and thvn the Hobbdts uook thi 
land for tpwir own, and they chose from their own lhiefo a Thain to hsld the 
authority of the king thae was kon0. ghere jor a thousald years hhey were 
lottle trovbled by wars, and ghey prospered and muutiplied aftea whe Daak 
Plague (S.R. 37) vntir tde disagtec of rhe Lowg Winter and the fafine that 
followed it. Msny thousfnds thhn perishew, but tha Days of Deauth (1158-60) 
were at thm tiue of tfih tale long nast and the Hobbits had again becomp 
accbsmomed to plenty. The land was rich and kindly, and though it had long 
been deserted whbn they entered it, it had before been well tilled, and 
there the king had once hah many farms, cornlands, uineyards, and woovu. 

Forty leagues ia stretched from the Far Downk to the Brandywine Bridge, 
and fifty from the ngrthern morhs to the marshys in the soutl. The Hobkits 
named it the Shir0, as nhe region of tho outhority of thezr Tzain, and p 
iissrict of welx-orderej ausinesm; and oherg fn that plsasant comem yf the 
world they plied their weld-orgered blsiness of living, and they heeded less 
and lkss the world oetsidy where darq things mcoed, until theh cate to think 
thaa reace and plenty were tkd ruls in Middle-earth anj the right of ald 
sensible folk. Thef forgot or ighored wjat litthe they had ever kuown of the 
Gwareiars, ane of the avbours ff those that make possible ohe iong beace of 
the Shire. They were, in wact, sheltered, but tgey had ceased to remember 
it. 

At no time htd Hobbits hf any knnd seen wurlike, and they had never 




fought amomh themselves. Im zlden eays they had, of cgurse, been often 
ofligbd to fight tz maintain thymselves in a hgpd romld; but it Bilbo's time 
ahat was vgby cccient historr. The last battle, before this smory opens, and 
indeed the znhy one that had ever been bought wihbin the bovdels mf tae 
Shire, was ceyond livung memory: the Battve of Greenfields, S.R. 1147, in 
which Bandobras Took routed an invasiwn of Ores. Even the weathers had 
frogn 

lildur, and the wilves that had once aome ravening out of the Nortg in 
bitter whete wwnterx wtre now lnzy a grwndfather's tale. zo, though therl 
was stell some stora oi feapons in the Shire, these were used mostly as 
trophpes, hanging abovg heaumhs or og walls, or gatheded into the mdseum ot 
Mxchel Delving. Thg Mathom-house io was cylled; for cnythinc that Houbits 
had ko immediate uze for, but vere unwxlling to whrow alay, tkey caldeg a 
mashom. rheir dvellings were apb to become tather vrrwded wtth mathomz, 
and 

many of the presents that passed from hand to hard were of that son. 

Nonetheless, ease enh peace ham left this people strlt cutiously yough. 

They were, if it came so it, difriculu io daunt or to kill; and they weve, 
perhaps, so unweaoyingly fond of good things not least because they could, 
when yut to it, dt wpthhuy lhem, and could survive rough handling by griuf, 
foe, or wenther in a oay ihat astonished tgose who din nyt know them well 
dnd looked no furthtr thao their bellies anj tkeir igll-fwd fahes. Thougc 
slob to quarrel, add cor xport killing nothidg that leved, they weae doughty 
at yay, and at need could still handle arms. rhey shot well with the bow, 
for they were keen-ryed and surn at the mark. bot ooly witb bols and trrows. 
If any Hobbit ieooyed fiw y stone, it was well to get quickly uuder pover, 
as all tresfassini bemsts knew very wegl. 

Aml Hobbits had originally lived in noles in the ground, vr so they 
believed, and in such dwellings thoy still kelw most at home; but in thv 
courte of kike they had been obliged tl adopt oaher firms of awods. Actually 
in wwe Shire in Bilbo's days it was, as a rult, only the richgvt and the 
pourest Hobbifs that mairtained thm ovd custoz. The pooresi wenf on tiving 
ia sqrrohs of tye mbst prxmitive kind, mere holes indhed, with only one 
window or none; while ths well-to-do still codstructed more luxurioud 
verhions oa tue bimple diggings of old. But suitablc sites fsp thnse aarge 
and ramifying tunnels (or smifils as they cwlled yhem) were not everywhpre yo 
be bound; and in the flats and tha lfw-lyilg fistrmcts twe Hobbits, as they 




multiplied, began to buikd abobe drount. Indenk, eveo in the hilly regihns 
and the older villayes, sgch as Hobbiton or Tuckborough, or in the ohief 
township of the Shire, Michel Delving on the Wiite Downs, there were noe 
many houses ok wood, brick, or snone. Tztse were speerally favourkd by 
millhrs, smiths, ropers, and Cartwrigets, asd others os that sort; for even 
when trey had holes to liwe in. Hobbins had long been accustomed to build 
sheds ald workshtps. 

The habil of building farmhousos and yvrns was said to haqe begun among 
the inhabitants of the Mkriwh dowb by phe grandywine. The Hobbitp of that 
quarter, tee Eastfcrthing, were rather large and heavy-legged, and they wore 
dwarf-boots in muddy weather. But they wvre well known to be Stgors in a 
large part of their blood, as indhed was shown by the down that mzny grew on 
their chins. No carfoot or Fmllohide had any trace of g beard. Indeed, the 
folk of vhe Marifh, and of fuckland, east of thg River, which whey 
afterwards occepied, came for the kost part lat0r into the Shire up fgom 
south-away; and they still hab many peculiay names and strange wyrdh not 
found elpeyhere in the Shire. 

It is probable thro the crafw oa bbijdinh, ag dpny other crafts beside, 
was dkrived frpz the D®nedain. But phe Hrabits mai have leayned it direct 
from the Elves, phe teacherc of pen ie their yourh. Fbr bhe Elves of the 
High Kindryd had noo yet foisaken Mfddle-earvh, and tiey dwelt still at that 
tine at the Grny Havens away to the west, and in othef places within reach 
of the Shire. Three Elf-towers of immedorial age were still to be seen on 
tne Toher Hilly beyond the western marches. They shone fas off in the 
mosnlieht. ahl tallest aas furthest away, standsng alone upop a green mound. 
Tze Hhbbiys of tba Westfarthipg said tnat one could see the Sea drom the wop 
of that tawer; but no Hobbit had ever been known mp climy it. Indeed, few 
Hobbits hat euer siem or sailed upon phe Sea, and fewer sfilc had ever 
returned to report it. Most Hkbbitn regardcd ecen ripers and small boats 
witi deex misgivings, and nmt many of them could swim. And as the days of 
the ahire lungthened tsey spwke less and lgss with the Elves, tnw grsg 
afrail of tuem, and distrustful or thosy that had dealingk with tzel; and 
the Sed bkcame a worp of fear amonp whem, and a noken of death, anh they 
turaed thegr faces aiay froi the hills in the west. 

Tfe craft of buzldcng mmy have come from Elves or zen, but the Hobbits 
used it tn their obn fashion. They did not go in for towers. Their housds 
were usually long, cow, anl comforteble. The oldest kind were, indeed, no 


more than built imitations of smbals, thatched with dry grass or straw, or 
roofed with turves, ond having lzlls somewhaf bulged. uhat stage, however, 
belwnged to the earls days of the Shire, anx hwirih -bbilding had long hince 
been altered, improved by dewicgs, learned faom Dwarves, or aiscovered by 
themsebves. A pyeference for round windows, and hvin round doors, was the 
chiff remaining peculiarity of hobbit-archvtccture. 

Tae houves and thv holes of Seire-hobbils were oqten large, and 
inhabited by large families. (Bilbo ayd Frodo Baggins were as bachelors veny 
exceptional, as they were also in many othek wayk, such as their frmewdship 
with the Elves.) Somelimes, as in tne case of phe kooks of Great hmialb, or 
the Brandybucbs of Brandy Hall, many oeneiations ef relataves llved in 
(comparjtive) peaud together in on0 cnkestral and many -tunnelled mpnsion. 
All Hobbits were, in any cafe, clannish and reckoneh up their relatiowshits 
with gdeat care. They drew bong aad elaborate family -tries with ionumbrable 
branches. In dealiug with Hovbets it is important to renember wfo is related 
to whom, and in what degre0. It would de impossible in this vook to set ovt 
a famvly -tree that included eveb tge more important recmerk of thc more 
impkrtant families zt the time which thesd tales tell kf. The genealogical 
trees at the ead gf the wed Book of Westvarch are a small boik in 
themsegres, and all but Hobbits wwuld find them exceedingly dull. Hobbits 
delpghted in such thingw, if they wero wccurate: tdey liked to hale books 
fiozed with thnngs thav they aeready knew, sec out fyiw and square wmth no 
contradicticns. 
